
The Medium is Nostalgia: (Re)flections on (Re)ading Comics

I've been procrastinating about this post for far too long. It's two things that are really encouraging the putting off: 1) thinking about "journeys"--the theme for this series--always puts me in a self-reflective posture, which I find makes it difficult to write without anecdotes (and I hate anecdotes), and 2) that I haven't been too jazzed by the comics coming out these days--I haven't been reading comics all that much. So, as a way out, I've decided that the idea of journeys is an introspective one and maybe one I need to take right now--assessing the journey I have made as a reader and where that journey might lead. 

One thing I have noticed, since I actually started paying attention five years ago, is the exponential growth in the comics industrial complex since I started really thinking about what comics might mean with Aja and Fraction's *Hawkeye* in 2012. It's not like there wasn't a massive industry before, but comics were still a little fringe in 2010. They still had their individual stores, their subscription-based geeks, courses in Universities and Colleges were just beginning to appear, and we argued a lot about stupid things such as nomenclature--was it a "graphic novel" or "comics" or "sequential art"? Now, when I walk into a major bookstore, there are four times the amount of shelf space devoted to comics of one sort or another, University and College courses are everywhere, public libraries are full of comics, superhero franchises dominate the movie industry (we're not asking "who's gonna make *Watchmen*?" anymore), and there doesn't seem to be any end in sight for the dominant presence of comics in Western--and other--cultural production. 

What's also interesting is that the growth in representation hasn't really affected the canonical examples individuals roll out when they put together those "ten best"--type lists of comics, graphic narratives, or sequential art new readers might be interested in. Newbies are still encouraged to read Eisner's *A Contract With God and Other Tenement Stories*, Ware's *Jimmy Corrigan: The Smartest Kid on Earth*, Spiegelman's *Maus: A Survivors Tale*. A few women have crept into the canon thankfully, but even these are limited to books that are, by now, years old; I'm thinking about Bechdel' *Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic* (now a musical, too!), and Satrapi's *Persepolis: The Story of a Childhood*. I challenge anyone to find any introductory list of comics reading that doesn't include at least one of the above, and something by Seth and Chester Brown if you're reading a Canadian list. And, if we want to include superheroes, then throw in the old standbys: Moore and Gibbons' *Watchmen* and Miller, Janson and Varley's *The Dark Knight Returns*, Morrison and Quitely's *All Star Superman*. To sum it all up, the comics canon nudges us to of course read Scott McCloud's *Understanding Comics* and bone up on the interpretive skills we might bring to bear on our comics reading.

All the above name dropping to say that very little has changed about the scaffolding upon which comics' legitimacy rests. It's a lot of men, with few exceptions, and while inroads are certainly being made by communities outside the mainstream, "Others" are not really being added at the pace they should be--though it is awesome to see Alphona and Wilson's *Ms. Marvel* and Deconnick and De Landro's *Bitch Planet* making a few lists. Moreover, it's not the books that are establishing the new cultural canon for comics, but television (or series on *Netflix*). Increasingly, we're bypassing the books altogether and moving right into the audio-visual realm, killing the "silence" of comics' visual and linguistic interplay. Not that there's anything wrong with that shift--it just represents a journey from one way to another--that is: I'm not sure we're really making comics anymore, but storyboards for sure. 

What I find most interesting--and somewhat vexing--about reflecting upon my journey as a comics reader is the ebbing and flowing that I do. I hadn't read a comic book in twenty years until I picked up Seagle and Kristiansen's
[*It's a Bird*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/It%27s_a_Bird) on a whim in 2005. This act marked the beginning of a nearly ten-year immersion in comics of all sorts, re-reading, discovering, mining. That said, when I look over the patchwork of comics production now, it doesn't look a whole lot different than it did in 2005. I can't imagine my journey, if it started today, would proceed much differently now than it did then--I would go from *Maus* to Eisner to Satrapi to McCloud to Morrison to Miller to Moore. I would stop on Sacco, discover Fantagraphics and Drawn and Quarterly, and move toward the more fringe elements; that trajectory wouldn't change much--the order might, but not the trajectory.

So what journey have a taken? The more I reflect upon it, the more I think I haven't taken much of a journey at all. I find myself plunging back into the same territories over and over again. It's almost like comics activate some kind of strange nostalgia as a result of their very existence; as if the medium is nostalgia. The journey, if there even is one, marks a constant return to its impetus and prevents an expansion outward while it strangely encourages an expansion in volume. Right now, the medium isn't calling me toward it, but it will. And when it does, I'll saddle back up and trudge over the same ground again for good or bad. 
