Graphixia Post
Comics and Mass Media


Conversations about comics and mass media often start with how comics are remediated into other forms and thus mutated in some way to suit an agenda--be that economic, social, or artistic. True or not, I'd like to diverge from that assumption and ask for a little more pressure on the question of what comics get remediated. The relatively recent surge in comics criticism, particularly the "professional" kind, has been to some extent spearheaded by the arrival of what we used to call the graphic novel. These largely unsuperhero stories, dominated by tropes of memoir and often built, narratively speaking, around problems of individual representation, allowed comics to be taken seriously as a mode of aesthetic production with cultural value (and I'm using that term "allowed" loosely, so don't freak out). All this provides context to argue that, for all the blustering about the importance of comics as a legitimate form of cultural representation, there's plenty to suggest that when they're remediated comics show themselves as, for better of worse, a project for pure consumption and economic capitalism absent of any collective cultural significance. 

**The Dominance of Memoir:**

It's profoundly suitable that the kinds of comics tending to act as a legitimizing force in the genre rely so heavily on memoir. Usually a bibliographical account of a historical event or sequence, building upon personal or lived experience, memoir dominates the comics we have come to see as pushing the art-form forward. *Maus*, *Contract with God*, *Fun Home*, *Essex County*, anything by Satrapi, Barry, Doucet, Seth, Ware, Clowes; all rely on personal narratives that present historical events through reconstructed memories. The tropes of memoir--revisiting past events, origin stories, alternate personal histories, character introspection--provide the foundation for most of the revisions in the superhero genre that might be lauded as innovative: *The Dark Knight Returns*, *Watchmen*, to name only two, foreground revisionary contexts to reorient characters and play with tropes of memory or resonance in the way they tell their tales. In short, these revisions play off the audience's knowledge of the established storylines to both activate feelings of nostalgia in the reader and revise the memories of the characters themselves. The trope of memoir in comics works to engage with memory at the same time that it creates new memories--in the characters, story, and audience. 

What these tropes of memoir allow is the retelling and remediation of, for example, an origin story in different contexts while still allowing the "original" or "trunk story" to remain. What's interesting to me is how the remediation of the comic is itself reliant on the audience's prior knowledge of the trunk origin story--there can be no new branches without first establishing the trunk. With each new remediation, media companies who own Superheroes, re-tell the origin story--on the back of the toy box, in the movie, in the video game. The remediation of memories in the characters is equalled by the way the audience's prior knowledge is used to confirm the legitimacy of the remediation. In other words, at the same time as the characters are themselves being remediated in a way that allows for new modes of story-telling so too is the audience. This remediation of memoir for the storylines and characters is coupled with the audience's nostalgia for their own personal memory encountering these storylines and characters for the first time. The exploitation of memoir and the subjective memory it encourages is a key feature of how comics sustain themselves in the cultural environment; characters don't die, they only remember and the same goes for their audiences.

This is all to say that generally, the remediation of comic books follows a particular course: superheroes only... maybe the other stuff if it gets enough attention and isn't going to be live action, but it can be a [musical](http://www.broadwayworld.com/article/FUN-HOME-Producers-on-Possible-Film-Adaptation-Theres-Definitely-Been-Interest-20150607). There is something to be said for lack of [Maus](http://www.instructables.com/id/MAUS/) action figures in that they exist, but they are largely produced through fan interactions. Difficult remediations take place outside the confines of [mass media](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95SbLV-MNh0) and exist in a space where direct contact between artist and artist seem to be a [priority](http://heebmagazine.com/heeb-exclusive-wordless-show-tell-art-spiegelman/52603). It's also *not* a space of memory, or the consumption and reliving of those memories, but a space of confirmation and creativity--of marking the profound effect the memoir of another has had on an individual who encountered it.     

**The Narrative of individualism and The Hollywood** 

I use "The Hollywood" above somewhat pejoratively, but I probably shouldn't. What I am hinting at is the predominance of narratives in remediated comics that prioritize individualism--and the individual experience of common phenomena--over the collective. The idea that there can be only one way to receive a narrative or character; that there is "The Hollywood" and we understand every other form of cinema by the shadow "The Hollywood" casts. When we read, watch, listen to, Superman we're supposed to yearn for escape from our dreary lives and imagine being something better. But, I'd argue that for the vast majority of the audience, that's not really why we're engaging with it anymore. Instead, we're looking for our Superman in the remediated version. We're not looking for a collective Superman--the one from the 1950s who stood as a metaphor for the possible escape from immigrant repression, economic stasis, and lack of opportunity. The world can no longer support a collective Superman--but we still freak out when there's the suggestion that the next remediation might be African American.

What we are looking for is the Superman that means something to us. It's the power of memory that makes this work and makes it attractive as a narrative mode for The Hollywood. A book like *Maus* does not allow for retelling in a different or remediated context without completely changing the meaning and the perspective--it becomes something *unMaus*. If it were to be retold, it would be too different and unrecognizable. This is not to say that a *Maus* musical would be bad, or a *Maus* doll tacky... it would just be different. However, Batman encourages retelling and remediation because the storylines are not bound by a personal viewpoint--other than the audience's encounter with that storyline. Rather than tell one story really well, we can tell a so-so story a thousand times and merchandise the hell out of it each and every time. In this case, the memoir is ours not the narrative's or the character's; it is entirely wrapped up in our encounters with it. Like Vlad, we are cycling on the stationary bike of time re-living our encounters over and over again as the remediation--in whatever form--reanimates our memory through the tropes of memoir. In this case, the story isn't that different and it doesn't matter anyway because what we're after is our memory of the story--our memory of Batman or Superman. We're memory junkies ready to re-consume our cultural foundations and biased zeitgeists over and over again because even if the story is *unBatman* or *unSuperman*, we still have our version. 

**So What Now?**

All comics are memoir. As a result, the remediation of any comics must account for both the memoir that is the story and the memory that belongs to the audience. There's an emphasis on remediating only those comics that audiences can associate with because their own memories are embedded in their experience of the story--we shy away from remediating the other productions of the genre. We often forget that comics and their stories were born of capitalism and repeated consumption--a disposable daily, weekly, monthly, and annual commodity. It should come as no surprise then that the comics we choose to remediate perpetuate comics' own origin story--treadmilling memories for both the medium and the audience. We'll pay to go back in time over and over again, just using different machines. 