
#246 Reading Bakuman: Reorienting Disorientation

I did something in preparation for this Graphixia contribution that I almost never do: I bought a physical book. When I enter into a comic book these days, it's most often done through my iPad. I've long been an advocate for comics' creators to move more robustly into digital spaces, optimizing the storytelling options available when devices such as the iPad are leveraged to rethink narrative structures. All that said, the wall I hit when I started "reading" Bakuman made me rethink a few things and forced a self-reflexive reckoning about the assumptions I bring to the act of reading. 

First off, full disclosure: I do not read Manga. Ever. This is the first time I have really settled in with a true Manga storyline in the traditional sense. I've noted snippets of Manga before, the odd short story or interesting layout, but I have never tried to read Manga in the way I read North American comics. Some of what I'm on about here is reflective of that first experience more than it is about deep critical insight. All *that* said again, holy shit. Turns out, I can't read.

dnw_graphixia_246-frontspiece.jpg

Not knowing what hell I was doing, I bought the book (from my local comics shop) and started to thumb through it. I wanted the experience of *Bakuman* to be one of discovery--so I just picked a tattered, neglected, near-remaindered, volume from off the shelf--number 9 if you're interested. Of course, I opened it the way I thought it should be opened and was immediately confronted with a description of what's "In the NEXT VOLUME" where the preamble or dedication should be. Glancing left, I noted the "This is the LAST PAGE" indicator with directions for the uninitiated that is me: "*Bakuman.* has been printed in the original Japanese format in order to preserve the orientation of the original artwork. Please turn it around and begin reading from right to left. Unlike English, Japanese is read right to left, so Japanese comics are read in reverse order from the way English comics are typically read. Have fun with it!" I immediately chastised myself for being such an ignorant buffoon, and was grateful for the authors' good natured "Have fun with it" for taking some of the pressure off and reducing the self-loathing. But my antennae were up to my bias about reading, and the assumptions I was bringing to this book. I was disoriented and distracted by my ignorance of the instructions and my desperate need for them. 

dnw_graphixia_246-front-cover.jpg

I spent a long time looking over the physicality of the book as a result of these directions, something I couldn't have done with a digital copy. I was just feeling my way around the book. As it turns out, the cultural lesson in the end-flap wasn't enough when I reoriented the book and dove in. I was all messed up. I started from the top right, thinking that was correctly "backwards," moved left, then down, then back right. Something about how things were unfolding didn't seem right. The story was totally incomprehensible to me. The narrative not quite right. The pictures seemed to *almost* present a narrative, but not quite. Characters were sitting down and moving in the wrong direction. Was this Manga convention I wondered? What was I missing? Is the Manga narrative always this fractured? Must be something wrong with the translation, I thought. (Always blame the translation when you don't understand something, right? I'm such a moron.) 

dnw_graphixia_246-page-example.jpg

I returned back to the front and went in again. This time, I tried to sequence the images more precisely. I began to assemble that narrative, a little awkwardly, but a story was revealing itself to me in my head. I started to feel stable, then I hit page six and everything seemed incorrect again. Wrong story. I had put together some semi-comprehensible narrative that wasn't right. It certainly wouldn't allow me to interpret the text in any meaningful way, let alone follow the story. 

Anyway, I finally figured it out--start at the bottom right, move left, then up, right to left, repeat. I was suddenly hyper conscious of my reading though--I was struggling through the narrative, relying on the images and deciphering the correctness of their sequence way more than I would with a North American comic, struggling with the Manga conventions I knew nothing about, I was even jarred by the placement of the titles. I felt a little racist, pissed off at myself for not giving enough energy to the task of reading, or getting into *Bakuman*; in short, I was even more disoriented by my own ignorance and the power of my own assumptions about reading comics. 

Reading *Bakuman* in the physical form made me aware of the conventions that govern my own reading in comics and how those conventions are inherently cultural and devastating in their "normalization" of the reading experience. The tangibility of the book and the way it facilitated scanning, flipping, checking-back, bookmarking, made more active, more prone to recognizing my own ignorance and trying to get myself out of that ignorance. 

Often, we refer to comics that follow the Western left-to-right reading process as "conventional comics," but it's clear they're only conventional if you're part of the convention. We often applaud disruptions in conventional narrative technique in comics--thinking Pia Guerra, Jill Thompson, Annie Wu, and others--wherein the gutter is split or transgressed, the page broken differently, spreads over two full pages. However, reading these disruptions when there is little sense of the conventions they are breaking renders the artiface moot and distances the reader, makes the purpose hard to decipher, and the exposes conventions rather than disrupting them. It's really hard to see all this in digital versions that tend to disrupt the actions of flipping, scanning, etc., I mention above.

dnw_graphixia_246-page-example-01.jpg

Furthermore, looking at the depictions in *Bakuman* was also a disorienting experience. So much yelling, wide-open mouths, similar faces, emojis in the balloons, everything is backwards, the story is so layered with previous storylines, characters, situations. All these Manga conventions--I won't use that word again, promise--destabilized my ability to follow the story without really working to piece things together. I was a mess, a reading disaster. Getting through six pages took me as long as it takes me to get through an entire Western comic. And I had no idea what the hell was happening in the story.  

Returning to my opening about the iPad brings me to the main point here--we're all victims of normalizing everything for our own cultural situation. The iPad, more than the book, can augment and direct our reading by allowing layers on top of the text / image, breadcrumbs that help us make sense of what we might find confusing. The device's ability to represent the comic frame-by-frame mitigates the disorientation of reading "backwards." Immersing myself in the tangible *Bakuman* brought home--to the privileged reader that I am--some of the struggles involved in learning second languages, where the syntax, layout, and logical progression are not based on Latinized, Germanic, forms. Images are no help, sequencing is frightening, and just chuck the whole cultural understanding or cultural context right out the window--it's hopeless.  

We're fond of reflecting upon how comics can help individuals learn to read. I wonder what else--ideologically speaking--comics might be capable of teaching. It might be fun to teach Manga in an English Literature class to illustrate the power of convention (sorry) in narrative, inter-textual connections, and in reinforcing cultural assumptions. That is, comics--and I'm calling Manga comics, don't care what you think--teach us **how** we read, what we're *looking* for when we read, and all the other assumptions, short-cuts, and comfort we derive from ingrained expectations about what we're doing when we read.

I'll admit, I never got past page six of *Bakuman* #9, but I will. Eventually. And I've learned more about **how** I read from six pages of *Bakuman* than I have learned from a comic in a long time.  