An Open Thread on The Openness of Graphixia

We're on an open thread this time around and, given that we're pretty close to the beginning of May, I always get a little sentimental about this space. Graphixia started with [a post](http://www.graphixia.ca/2010/10/fun-home-and-secret-identity/) in October 2010, but we didn't start keeping stats until May 1, 2011, which is pretty close to five full years ago. That is one hell of a long time ago. Everything was five years younger than it is now. Since that time Graphixia has the following line: 86,555 Pageviews, 66,269 Unique Pageviews, an average time on site of 1:47--an eternity in internet terms, with all its glancing and scanning and probing. Comics are not nearly as controversial as they were five years ago. It seems weird to say, but five years has changed things quite bit--we were still calling them "graphic novels" five years ago. Graphixia has centred itself against the rising tide of comics and ridden the wave to where it is now. 

The most read post is one about *Hawkeye* that has to do with [Anthropomorphism and Skeumorphism](http://www.graphixia.ca/2013/07/123-hawkeye-11-anthropomorphic-skeuomorphisms/), which received the benefit of a very popular retweet. Since that time, as authors, we have engaged with creators through Twitter, interviewed them on YouTube, presented papers, written several articles in peer-reviewed journals and book chapters. We've grown from Peter Wilkins and I, to a global entourage of scholars from Canada, England, Scotland, Belgium, and other guest posts from I know not where. The core group of contributors, me, Peter, Brenna, and Scott all still contribute on a regular basis. 

I note all this because I think this is a good example of how scholarship can work at a grassroots level. Graphixia takes the discussion of comics seriously most of the time. There are notable exceptions of course, and I'll get to why those are important in a moment. As an editorial group--well mostly just myself, Peter, and Brenna--we infrequently have heated discussions about how "serious" or "academic" we should be. Sometimes, we have issues with how serious Graphixia should be, or how it might be a beachhead (to use a word Peter deploys often) for conversations about comics. I have always maintained that Graphixia started as a counter-narrative to any kind of serious pressure and we should be doing more to challenge the prescriptions of serious discourse. As with all good partnerships, we always leave these conversations a little richer for the other's opinion and we always manage to see the benefit and principles behind the other's diatribe. Having a platform as flexible and fluid as Graphixia, with no real set agenda, provides an excellent context for these ongoing discussions about what actually defines "serious" discourse. I have always liked to define Graphixia's approach as shallow depth. All this to say, that an absence of prescriptions and conventions has resulted in a lot of writing, a lot of work, a lot. All this to say that it's worth pushing Graphixia forward as an example of how scholarship works when it's not really scholarship, but public discourse out in the open. 

Sometimes, we build it and no one comes (like our last [Comics and Mass Media gambit](http://graphixia.ca/comicsandmassmedia/)--where the hell were you guys anyway?). Graphixia is still representative of a pretty closed system, we're mostly male, mostly White, mostly Western, and mostly educated--but at least we're aware of it! We get great reaction to, and reflection upon, our work most of the time but it's mostly from people we know. We may not be a global powerhouse on par with BoingBoing, but we have a reasonably diverse group that represent a few different perspectives. Point is, for all its glaring omissions--usually from me--and its mashup of personal narrative, critical distance, rage, genuine curiosity, Graphixia still stands as a convoluted repository for a group's thinkings about comics. What's more interesting is how Graphixia reflects our growth as readers of comics--go back and look at the early entries; they're all on "canonical" books--*Watchmen*, *Louis Riel*, *Batman*, *Spiderman*. Then, we take a turn--thanks to Brenna--and do more theme sessions (which we should totally do more of) on Jeff Lemire and the like. One can see our development as a crew, how we change and morph as we read more and participate more and engage in all the ancillary discussions generated out of our expanding community. We're always open to more members.

Now, to get back to the number above. That post I wrote on *Hawkeye* has been looked at, or read, depending upon your generosity of interpretation, according to google stats, 1804 times. At 3:35 average time on page, there's a generous number of people lingering over the piece--perhaps leaving their browser window hanging open while they go read the comic, which is fine. Suffice to say, of anything I have ever written that bit about *Hawkeye* is by far the most-read, most-looked-at thing. Graphixia as a whole is the most looked at thing I've ever been a part of too. Our distribution system boils down to Brenna's retweets and twitter in general. We're not in libraries, we're not in bookstores, there's nothing to sell, nothing to even address, just a bunch of people talking--semi-seriously--about stuff related to comics. Somehow, we've managed to pull this off for five freaking years.  

In the meantime, Peter and I are a long way from where we were when we started Graphixia. He's really the one who does comics now; I've admittedly diverted into other areas more closely aligned with the Digital Humanities. But, man, Peter is still right on it and so is Brenna. I really enjoy watching things emerge from Graphixia, so it's important to me that Peter and Brenna--the two early adopters--are still on it. At the same time, I would never have diverged into the other things I do now if it weren't for Graphixia. As the site's chief engineer, I needed to learn Wordpress, other technical stuff, and so I used Graphixia as leverage to start other more complex coding projects and experimentations. So maybe for me it's not comics so much anymore, but the community in which I now find myself would never been found without the pressure to create an open space for talking about comics.

Graphixia is a fantastic mix of all the political interests entangled within the people who write for it. That's what open access is about for me: entanglement. Distorting the traditionally clear lines of ownership, authorship, audience and subject-matter while exploiting the internet's ability to distort geographies, space, representation, and subject attention (the interest we pay to certain esoteric things such as comics, for instance). We have all entered into the traditional peer-reviewed world--we have PhDs, are writing PhDs, articles, papers, conferences, etc. So, we haven't altogether left the traditional confines of the towers of knowledge to which we ultimately belong and that we ultimately represent. But, whatever, Graphixia represents a space where, one could, if one wanted, shed all of those labels and write whatever the fuck one wanted--as long as it's about comics. And that has made all the difference. 