Pic of She-Hulk and The Thing

What would a sexual liaison between The Thing and She-Hulk be like? Given our theme this round, of human / inhuman, these are the questions that occur to me. I'm thinking about how sexuality, as it is represented off the pages of North American superhero comics, often problematizes how we might think about sexual activities. While superheroes often find themselves in situations that would lead to--or even require--the consummation of a relationship in a physical way, we rarely think about Supes "doing it" or even how their genitalia might be represented given their superpowers.  

Watchmen Pic

First up, let's talk seriously about how mainstream superhero comics represent sexual activity: they don't. The only one that comes immediately to mind, and I'm not sure it's creator would be happy with it being mainstream, is *Watchmen*. There are several sexual scenes in *Watchmen*, all involving one version or another of silk spectre (because you can only have one woman to have sex with I guess). That said, the scene that illustrates our uncomfortable relationship with sexuality and superheroes is nicely articulated in the image above. 

Freaking out over Dr. Manhattan's self-twosome--the product of his "universal" powers--is pretty much what any of us would do when confronted with the possibility of superhero sex. Let's think about the dynamics at play here: Dr. Manhattan is a reconstruction of molecules, he can see forward and back, he can be two places at once, he can read minds. So, he knows exactly how Laurie will respond to this, and other, advances (which is creepy because he freaks her out anyway). Despite the comic's concentration on the personal dynamics of their relationship, we can't help but wonder how the sex would go down. Who or what is Lauris having sex with exactly? And, how good is he at pleasuring her? (He should be unbelievable in bed.) Where does his or her libido come from? (Sorry, awkward pun there... it's hard to write about sex with them.) How Dr. Manhattan experience sexual pleasure? How does Laurie know when he is experiencing sexual pleasure--did Jon reconstruct the inner junk, so to speak? 

Speaking of junk (and this is by far my favourite part of writing on this subject), how exactly is the human genitalia of a superhero affected by the substance, situation, context, producing the superpower? Save for fanzines and dark webs, these questions are not answered by mainstream comics. Instead, we get the usual line about being a good family man:

[Spiderman as Good Husband](http://johnbyrnedraws.tumblr.com/post/127568916456/amazing-spider-man-1-page-38-by-john-byrne)

Of course, being a "full-time husband to Mary Jane" means a lot of things, including boinking. Despite apparently leaving Spiderman the superhero behind, one assumes that the superpowers remain. This great write-up on [spider sex](http://animals.howstuffworks.com/arachnids/spider8.htm) gives us this fascinating tidbit: "spiders don't mate by coupling these organs. Instead, the male deposits some sperm onto a small web and picks it up on the end of his pedipalps. When the female is in position, the male deposits the sperm in the female's genital opening." Alright then. So, how much of the spider's characteristics transferred into Peter Parker and what kind of kinky play is Mary Jane into. Then there's this: a spider's "reproductive organs are at the rear of the abdomen." So where exactly is Peter Parker's dick? It puts a whole new spin on his costume would actually have to look doesn't it. 

Think about the Fantastic Four's genitalia for a second. Try to unsee Mr. Fantastic's snaking member as it stretches, twists, twirls and elongates who knows where and when. While the comic concentrates on his superior intelligence, perhaps his monikers belies another source of his fame--both parts of his name (Reed and Richards ("Dicks")) are penisy. Then, does the Human Torch's member actually flare up? Because, that could be problematic. Both of these thought exercises are tame when we think about how the invisible woman's genitalia could actually be hidden or invisible--so many lousy metaphors for women's body parts and here's yet another one--keep it clean and hidden ladies, please. The men and can flare up and flop it out, but please, women keep it invisible.

Which brings me to The Thing--a better name for this discussion there could not be. What in crap holy hell does his junk look like? Keep in mind, that all these people have sexual relationships. Reed and Sue have a child, so we know they've had sex. And we're not supposed to think about how that all goes down? Superman and Wonder Woman! What's that like? Then there's the bestiality: Batman and Catwoman, Hawkman and Hawkgirl, Black Canary and Green Arrow; I don't even want to know what happens when Wolverine gets an erection.   

I bring all this up because it's fun and it raises questions about representation. I'm not that interested in how what I'm talking about brings up question around insecurity with human genitalia, morality discussions, or the way comics "educate" young people about sexual activities and courtship. But just because I'm not interested doesn't mean these questions aren't important. Maybe The Thing is a representation of herpes at its worst, as an unjustifiable representation of societal stigma; maybe the Human Torch is the embodiment of the "burning pain" of syphillus. Reed Richards the product of runaway sexual experimentation--"it's gonna fall off if you keep playing with it!" and Sue, well, she's what happens when you're a woman thinking about having sex, or having sex, or being sexual, or being human. There are some real ethical questions raised by how mainstream superhero comics represent the surfaces of sexual relationships, but rarely the actions and never the naked genitalia required to participate equally in an exchanged-based sexual relationship. All Batman wants to do is kiss Catwoman... right.   

 Thinking about sexual situations through a human reality that collides with the inhuman characteristics of superheroes sometimes reveals the shallow surfaces of our culture. It renders inert the moral curtain that shields the procreative or purely pleasurable act from view. At the same time, it hints at the rich fantasy world underlying the surface fantasies of being a superhero. In an increasingly inhuman world, we have to ask: how the hell would Superman fuck?  

