221 The Comics Code Revisions of 1971, Will Eisner, and The Beginning of Now

The title above is a bit misleading since I'm looking here to make a claim about cultural shifts that act as impetus for aesthetic movements. While it's always a risky move to associate cultural shifts with aesthetic turns (sorry, a lot of turning and shifting metaphors, but stay with me), comics in the 1970s respond to socio-economics in a way that seems to entrench them as a representative aesthetic medium. At the same time, and as a result of similar reactive moves, the 1970s represent a watershed moment for freedom of expression in comics outside the nature of its aesthetic practice. That is, at the same time that comics are responding to the depressing socio-economic conditions of the 1970s, they are also establishing new currents for distribution. The result is the establishment of a comics cannon that, rather than represent an ironic and heavily sexualized reactive underground (Crumb, Pekar) or the Superman Condition (that anyone can be great as long as they have superpowers), tends to lean more heavily on comics as a metaphor for disenfranchised cultural representation. 

The disenfranchisement metaphor also extends to the establishment of broader networks for distribution, figuratively disenfranchising Marvel and DC monopolies in favour of a more open distribution method. Bottom line: the Comics Code revision of 1971 might serve as a metaphor for the shifting cultural hegemonies both inside and outside comics production that marks the beginning of a more literary turn in comics production and aesthetic representation. 

The 1970s represent a moment where the medium gets organized in a way that is independent from the two major distribution houses of DC and Marvel. A reformed code born out of shifting cultural ideals of the 1960s, a do-it-yourself ethos also taken from the 1960s independent comics scene couple with attention to more canonical forms of storytelling and a deeper understanding of established tropes in comics production, suggests that the 1970s, rather than the countercultural production of the 1960s or the utopian idealism Golden Age of the 1950s, may have been the beachhead moment for comics as a valuable aesthetic medium capable of deep cultural commentary. 

Will Eisner's *Contract with God* appears in 1978 and, though debatable, represents the beginning of comics as a "literary" medium. The quotes around literary are there because the stress here is on how comics turn in on there own aesthetic sensibilities rather than how they ape literary stories or narratives. When we reimagine New York in the 1970s for instance, it's a long way from bring the model for Batman's Gotham or Superman's Metropolis; it is a city on the brink of bankruptcy. For from being a hub for cultural and economic elites, New York is destitute. Its remaining aesthetic pioneers are those that challenge the prevailing cultural currents by hanging out at Studio 51, Warhol's Factory, and frequenting Times Square's pornographic features such as *Deep Throat* and *Debbie Does Dallas*. One of the interesting ways to think about this is that the 1970s has no over-arching socio-cultural narrative--no civil rights movements, economic prosperity, no fight against political collusion, only seemingly perpetual racial crisis, economic crisis, political crisis. What artists like Eisner provide is precisely a narrative about American life that rather than representing a press away from traditional modes of storytelling returns to the well-worn, stable, social contract and moral foundations of aesthetic practice. At the same time, it asks legitimate questions around the nature of contracts between the ideal and the real that have, by the 1970s, been shattered for most. 

Pic 1

Of course, thinking about how *Contract with God* functions as a metaphor for the disenfranchisement of the 1970s is where the connection to socio-cultural conditions reaches its apex. In the backwash of 1960s idealism and the riptide of the energy crisis Eisner's narratives stand as models for these disenfranchised populations. The tropes are uncommon for comics at the time but representative of the time: socio-economic frustration and disillusionment; domestic violence; racial, religious, and ethnic questions. Where comics before may have offered an escape from the drudgeries of everyday life, Eisner's representation of the socio-economic climate of 1970s is all too soaked in the depression of East Coast America. 

Pic 2

Another facet of *Contract with God* is that it breaks through into the bookstore. Rather than appearing solely in the comic book store, Eisner's work problematizes the straight-line distribution model that the medium itself precipitates. No longer "just a comic," the medium has extended its catalogue reference. There's some work to be done around Eisner's work being published by Baron Books, the house that also published *Great Illustrated Classics*, but not here. The natural extension of this publication displacement is the direct marketing of Dave Sim, whose self-publishing ethos further extends the domain into which comics might extend. Briefly, comics are clearly responding to the changing socio-economic traditions both in terms of storylines (or aesthetic representation) and distribution methodologies. 

This brief and entangled missive cannot do justice to the multifarious currents that meet in 1970s comics production. That noted, its worth really thinking about how the 1970s is under-represented in discourses about comics history. Often focused on Eisner's work, or that of Dave Sim, our critical attention on the decade seems to attend to it as a bridge between what comes before (Golden Era and rise of Independent Comics) and after (1980s revival, 1990s super-hero re-entrenchment). 

Perhaps what's important about the 1970s isn't the comics themselves, but the way the 1970s marked the end of the power contained in the traditional Comics Code--and its "seal of approval"; the end of the straight-line distribution model dominated by DC and Marvel; the end of comics as a single medium. All of which is replaced with artistic and aesthetic integrity--or at least the sense of it; the birth of direct marketing and other different distribution models, the sprawl of comics as a medium, out of one catalogue category into many--hence the "debates" around what to call it (Graphic Novel, sequential art, comic, shit, etc.). Given these principles, the 1970s clearly encourage the birth of a then nascent medium that will eventually yield more complex culturally-relevant storylines (*Maus*), challenge the central principles of comics design (*Watchmen*), force a re-contextualization of comics' own canonical histories (*Batman: Dark Knight Returns*), and a de-industrialized comics production (*Cerebus*). It would seem that out of the hangover of the 1970s emerges the foundational mechanics for comics as we understand them today.

Note: If you're interested, you can review the code and the changes [here](http://cbldf.org/comics-code-revision-of-1971/).

