What Evil Lurks in the Hearts of Men? The Shadow Knows!

This next segment for Graphxia has me stumped. I'll tell you why: we're doing media properties, or more generally, how comics interact with / as media properties. When I first thought about doing this, I thought it would be easy. But then, when I reflected, it got real complex real fast. One of the main things I noticed was that I was always fighting against an imagined bias of some sort. For instance, was I a fan of comics in movies or not, and if I was, how did that matter--should I hate movies and align with the comics or should I love movies and hate comics? In any event, it always feels in subjects like this one that you need to pick a side. So I didn't. 

Different forms of the shadow--starts as a radio drama and then moves to become a pulp story and then into comics in the 1940s right up until now, branching off a series in 2012. Scott can finish the rest of the bibliography. The point here is that the Shadow's representation through one media or another is extensive. And, what's real interesting is how one medium usually leads to a response from the other medium. The inclusion of The Shadow's Margo Lane (neé lois?) was introduced on radio a full four years before she made it into the pulps and eventually into comics from there. 

The point of all this is to say that we often set up the different media representations of comics as dichotomies to the "originality" of the comic. However, we would probably be better served if we thought of things as an exchange of like representations. When Watchmen was made into a file, it spurred a Watchmen reboot that gave us background / origin stories for all the main heroes in the original book... 